title: "Adaptive Ensemble Refinement of Protein Structures in High Resolution Electron Microscopy Density Maps with Radical Augmented Molecular Dynamics Flexible Fitting"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/sarkar2021adaptive
date: 2021-08-21
type: pub
author: "Daipayan Sarkar, Hyungro Lee, John W. Vant, Matteo Turilli, Josh V. Vermaas, Shantenu Jha, Abhishek Singharoy"
venue: "bioRxiv"
paperurl: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.07.471672v3.abstract
abstract: "Recent advances in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) have enabled modeling macromolecular complexes that are essential components of the cellular machinery. The density maps derived from cryo-EM experiments are often integrated with manual, knowledge-driven, and physics-guided computational methods to build, fit, and refine molecular structures. Going beyond a single stationary-structure determination scheme, it is becoming more common to interpret the experimental data with an ensemble of models, which contributes to an average observation. Hence, there is a need to decide on the quality of an ensemble of protein structures on-the-fly, while refining them against the density maps. We introduce such an adaptive decision making scheme during the molecular dynamics flexible fitting (MDFF) of biomolecules. Using RADICAL-Cybertools, and the new RADICAL augmented MDFF implementation (R-MDFF) is examined in high-performance computing environments for refinement of two protein systems, Adenylate Kinase and Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenase. The use of multiple replicas in flexible fitting with adaptive decision making in R-MDFF improves the overall quality of the fit and model by 40% relative to the refinements of the brute-force MDFF. The improvements are particularly significant at high, 2 - 3 Å map resolutions. More importantly, the ensemble model captures key features of biologically relevant molecular dynamics that is inaccessible to a single-model interpretation. Finally, this pipeline is applicable to systems of growing sizes, with the overhead for decision making remaining low and robust to computing environments."
---